<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
      "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The Forms Working Group</title>
  <style type="text/css">
  body { 
    margin-left: 6%; 
    margin-right: 3%;
    background-color: #FFFFFF; 
    font-family: Trebuchet, Arial, sans-serif
  }
  a img { border-style: none; color: #FFFFFF; }
  h1,h2 { color: #006699 }
  h3, h4 { color: black }
  th.white {background: #FFFBF0}
  td.white {background: #FFFBF0}
  th {background:#E0C0C0}
  td {background:#C0C0C0}
  em { font-style: italic; }
  strong { font-weight: bold }
  b, strong { color:#006699 }caption { text-decoration: underline; margin-top: 1em }
  p.splash { color: #006699 }
  p.special {
    background:#CCFFFF;
    padding: 0.5em;
    border: none;
    margin-right: 5%;
  }
 .fig { text-align: center; vertical-align: middle }
  blockquote { color: #003366; font-style:italic }
  pre { font-family: Trebuchet, Arial, sans-serif; color:#006699;}
  div.news {
            background: rgb(255,204,255);
            margin: 1em;
            padding: 0.5em 1em;
            border: none;
          }
  p.intro { font-style: italic }</style>
</head>

<body xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<p class="banner"><a href="../../"><img alt="W3C" width="72" height="48"
src="../../Icons/w3c_home" /> </a> <a href="/interaction">  </a></p>

<p><a href="#email11">Public Mail Lists/Archives</a> | <a
href="wiki/XForms_Implementations">Implementations</a> | <a
href="#documents">Documents</a> | <a href="Test/">Test Suite</a> | <a
href="http://xformsinstitute.com/validator/"
title="Online XForms Validator by XForms Institute">Validator</a> | <a
href="2003/xforms-faq">FAQ</a> | <a
href="2003/xforms-for-html-authors">Tutorial</a> | <a
href="#deliverables">Schedule of Deliverables</a> | <a
href="#dependencies">Dependencies</a> | <a
href="http://www.w3.org/2002/Forms/Activity.html">Activity Statement</a> | <a
href="2009/charter2010.html">Charter</a> | <a
href="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/dbwg/details?group=32219">Participants</a> | <a
href="wiki/">Wiki</a> | <a
href="http://www.w3.org/2005/06/tracker/xforms/">Issue Tracking</a></p>

<h1><a id="wg" name="wg">The Fo</a><a id="wg1" name="wg1">rms Working
Group</a></h1>

<p><strong>The Forms Working Group was officially closed on
	2015-04-08</strong></p>
<p>Technical work may continue at the W3C
    <a href="https://www.w3.org/community/xformsusers/">XForms
	Users Community Group</a>.
</p>

<p>The Forms working group is <a
href="http://www.w3.org/2007/03/forms-charter.html">chartered</a> by the W3C to
develop the next generation of forms technology for the world wide web. The
mission is to address the patterns of intricacy, dynamism, multi-modality, and
device independence that have become prevalent in Web Forms Applications around
the world. The technical reports of this working group have the root name <a
href="#waXForms">XForms</a> due to the use of XML to express the vocabulary of
the forms technology developed by the working group.</p>

<p>The Forms Working Group is comprised of W3C members and invited experts. The
Working Group meets weekly by phone. Face to face meetings occur roughly every
3 months and are hosted by member organizations. We are especially interested
in people with a rich experience in developing Web forms and supporting
tools.</p>

<h2>Joining</h2>

<p>To join, ask your W3C Advisory Committee Representative to use <a
href="http://www.w3.org/2004/01/pp-impl/32219/join">this link</a> to nominate
you and agree to the patent policy. Please also have your W3C Advisory
Committee Representative send an email to <a
href="mailto:correc@ti.con">correc@ti.con</a> to confirm that your
organization is prepared to commit the time and expense involved in
participating in the Working Group. You will be expected to attend all Working
Group teleconferences and face to face meetings and to respond in a timely
fashion to email requests and action items.</p>

<div class="news" id="news">
<h2>News</h2>

<p><strong>2013-03-12: Orbeon Forms 4.0 Released</strong>. Featuring several
XForms 2.0 features. <a
href="http://blog.orbeon.com/2013/03/announcing-orbeon-forms-40.html">Blog
post</a>. <a
href="http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/release-notes/40">Release
notes</a>.</p>

<p><strong>2012-08-07:</strong> <strong>Public working draft of <a
href="../../TR/2012/WD-xforms20-20120807/">XForms 2.0</a></strong>. The live
version of the spec is <a href="wiki/XForms_2.0">on the wiki</a>.</p>

<p><strong>2011-04-26: Tutorial - An Introduction to XForms for Digital
Humanists</strong>. At the Digital Humanities 2001 Conference at Stanford, Palo
Alto, California, there will be a half-day introductory tutorial on XForms for
the Humanities. <a
href="https://dh2011.stanford.edu/?page_id=507">More...</a></p>

<p><strong>2011-04-09: Introduction to XForms course</strong>: Black Mesa
Technologies is pleased to announce a two-day hands-on introductory course on
XForms to take place 16-17 June 2011 in San Carlos, California. <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/2011Apr/0003.html">More...</a></p>

<p><strong>2011-02-01: betterForm 'limegreen'</strong>: Betterform has a
forthcoming release of their XForms system, codenamed <em>limegreen.</em> In a
blog post they have given information about what is coming in the new version.
<a
href="http://betterform.wordpress.com/2011/01/20/whats-new-in-betterform-limegreen/">More...</a></p>

<p><strong>2011-01-19: IBM Forms 4.0</strong>. The <a
href="http://www.ibm.com/software/lotus/products/forms/">IBM Forms</a> team has
announced a major release of its XForms-powered software suite. <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/2011Jan/0002.html">More...</a>
</p>

<p><strong>2010-07-26: New XForms 1.1 Implementation.</strong> <a
href="http://www.seneca.nl/">Seneca</a> is currently implementing XForms 1.1 in
the next release of <a href="http://ixperion.smartsite.nl/">Smartsite
iXperion</a> and Smartsite Content Management Server, the leading Dutch Web
CMS. The Smartsite iXperion XForms implementation is written as a multi-tiered
application in C# (.NET) and can be hosted on any .NET based system. XHTML +
jQuery/AJAX rendering is included as a pluggable render device in the XForms
architecture. Other render devices can easily be plugged in. The XHTML output
will be accessible, WCAG and “Web Guidelines” compliant and built using
“Progressive Enhancement” techniques. Smartsite iXperion XForms thus
downgrade well, even in non-scripting environments, but will still have a
slick, state-of-the-art look and feel in modern browsers. <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/2010Jul/0006.html">More...</a></p>

<p><strong>2010-06-30</strong>: <strong>Xfolite</strong>. Xfolite is a
light-weight XForms client for the J2ME platform. It was originally created at
Nokia Research Center, and it includes a DOM and XPath 1.0 implementation as
well as an XForms engine that implements the XForms 1.1 specification almost
completely. XML Schemas and CSS are outside project scope, however. Xfolite is
open source and licensed under the LGPL license. <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/2010Jun/0007.html">More...</a></p>

<p><strong>2010-06-16</strong>: <strong>betterForm XRX Edition</strong>. The <a
href="http://www.betterform.de/">betterFORM project</a> has released a new
version (3.1) of its XForms-based toolkit, with a focus on the combination of
eXistDB with betterFORM to provide a complete platform for developing XRX
(XForms REST XQuery) applications that use XML technologies from front to back.
A graphical installer makes it easy to quickly get started. <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/2010Jun/0004.html">More...</a></p>

<p><strong>2010-06-07</strong>: <strong>Orbeon Forms updated</strong>. The
server-side implementation of XForms, <a
href="http://www.orbeon.com/forms/download">Orbeon Forms 3.8</a> is now
available, with <a
href="http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/release-orbeon-forms-38">over
350 improvements</a> since the previous release, including a new <a
href="http://www.orbeon.com/forms/compare">Professional Edition</a>. Orbeon
Forms is an open source forms solution which includes an XForms implementation,
the <a href="http://www.orbeon.com/forms/orbeon-form-runner">Form Runner</a>
runtime, and the <a href="http://www.orbeon.com/forms/orbeon-form-builder">Form
Builder</a> form designer.</p>

<p><strong>2010-05-17</strong>: <strong>Forms Working Group
rechartered</strong>. Today the W3C announced that the Forms Working Group has
been rechartered for two years. <a href="2009/charter2010.html">The new
charter</a> includes work on XForms 1.2, XForms 2.0, XML Events 2.0, XForms for
HTML, as well as maintenance of XForms 1.1. To join the working group, please
see the link above, under "Joining".</p>

<p><strong>2010-03-19</strong>: <strong>New XForms Implementation</strong>. The
<a href="http://www.betterform.de/">betterFORM project</a> released Version 3.0
codenamed 'lightSteelBlue' to the public. It combines a full XForms 1.1
implementation with the Dojo toolkit for enterprise-level solutions. betterFORM
allows easy creation of highly dynamic Web 2.0 user interfaces with attractive
controls and layout. You can add validations, calculations, actions and events
to build complete web applications in a declarative way.</p>

<p><strong>2010-02-02</strong>: <strong>Swiftfox browser for Linux comes with
XForms pre-installed</strong>. <a href="http://getswiftfox.com/">Swiftfox</a>
is a free Firefox-based browser for Linux that is a good alternative for
Firefox for Linux. It contains a set of software builds of Mozilla Firefox and
is written to maximize efficiency on Intel and AMD microprocessors. Swiftfox
can be downloaded in open source code and proprietary binaries. Add-ons for
Mozilla Firefox are compliant with Swiftfox. </p>

<p>The XForms extension is preinstalled and enabled. <a
href="http://www.ilovefreesoftware.com/01/linux/swiftfox-free-firefox-alternative-for-linux.html">More...</a></p>

<p><strong>2010-01-27</strong>: <strong>emagiC CMS.Net</strong> is a milestone
in web content management, both for web developers and for web masters. Thanks
to the advanced logic of the administration interface, the system makes it easy
to input, publish and manage information on a website. The combination of
content management and site management also offers a high degree of
flexibility.</p>

<p>The XForms application based on the new W3C XForms standard is the flagship
of the modules. It manages structured content such as product catalogues, news
items, press releases, jobs.</p>

<p>Over 250 medium and large companies and organisations in Belgium and the
Netherlands alone have already made the right choice by opting for emagiC CMS.
They are active in a variety of sectors: government, industry, distribution,
healthcare, European institutions, ICT, banking and insurance, car industry,
telecommunications, transport, fashion, chemistry, media, financial and
marketing services, real estate, tourism, non-profit and many more. <a
href="http://www.emagiccms.com/">More...</a></p>

<p><strong>2009-12-21</strong>: <strong>eXist now directly supports
XForms</strong>. <a href="http://exist.sourceforge.net/">eXist</a> now directly
supports XForms via Alain Couthures' excellent XSLTForms processor. XSLTForms
implements the XForms standard within the browser and is thus easy to
integrate. However, eXist will also work with other XForms processors like
Orbeon or Chiba. <a
href="http://exist.sourceforge.net/xforms/xforms.html">More...</a></p>

<p><strong id="d2009-10-20">2009-10-20</strong>: The Forms Working group is
pleased to inform you of the <a
href="http://www.w3.org/News/2009#entry-6528">W3C announcement</a> that <a
href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-xforms-20091020/">XForms 1.1</a> is now a
W3C Recommendation. XForms 1.1 substantially upgrades the XML data processing
platform introduced by XForms 1.0 by adding web service, REST service and other
connectivity capabilities, conditional and iterative event action handlers,
user interface improvements, and many other refinements. See also the <a
href="2009/testimonials.html">testimonials</a>.</p>

<p><strong>2009-10-05</strong>: EPiServer CMS is a fast, flexible and robust
Web Content Management system that is used by thousands of organizations and
companies around the world for managing their Web sites and intranets. <a
href="http://world.episerver.com/en/Documentation/Items/Tech-Notes/EPiServer-CMS-5/EPiServer-CMS-5-R2-SP1/Developing-with-XForms/">It
supports XForms natively</a>.</p>

<p><strong>2009-10-02</strong>: The <a
href="https://community.emc.com/docs/DOC-4345">EMC Documentum XForms Engine</a>
(codenamed Formula) is a pure client-side XForms implementation that runs
entirely from within a web browser. It is capable of rendering very flexible
and dynamic forms without the need for a plugin or processing outside of the
browser. EMC provides the EMC Documentum XForms Engine free of charge for
development purposes. Formula has been built using Google Web Toolkit. <a
href="http://137.69.120.115:8080/xformsdemo/">Online demo</a></p>

<p><strong id="d2009-08-18">2009-08-18</strong>: The Forms Working group has
completed the candidate recommendation implementation phase for <a
href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/PR-xforms11-20090818/">XForms 1.1</a>, and it
is now been published as a W3C Proposed Recommendation. W3C member companies
now have until September 22 to comment and vote on advancing the specification
to a W3C Recommendation.</p>

<p><strong id="d2009-06-04">2009-06-04</strong>: The W3C Forms Working Group <a
href="http://www.w3.org/2009/06/04-forms-minutes.html">resolved</a> today to
request advancement of the <a
href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/specs/XForms1.1/index-all-20090604.html">working
group's latest version of XForms 1.1</a> to <a
href="http://www.w3.org/2005/10/Process-20051014/tr.html#maturity-levels">W3C
Proposed Recommendation</a> based on sufficient interoperable implementation
experience as defined in the exit criteria of the <a
href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/CR-xforms11-20071129/">XForms 1.1 Candidate
Recommendation</a>.</p>

<p><strong id="d2009-06-03">2009-06-03</strong>: <a
href="http://www.orbeon.com/forms/download">Orbeon Forms 3.7.1</a> is now
avaiable. It includes over <a
href="http://www.orbeon.com/ops/doc/home-changes-371">400 improvements</a>
since version 3.6, including enhanced XForms 1.1 support, reusable user
interface controls based on <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/xbl/">XBL 2</a>, and
a new preview of Orbeon Form Builder (Orbeon's web browser based visual form
designer). </p>

<p><strong id="d2009-05-31">2009-05-31</strong>: The XForms 1.1 implementation
reports for the <a
href="2008/XForms11ImplReports/UbiquityFF3/ResultsTable.html">Ubiquity XForms
Firefox processor</a> and the <a
href="2008/XForms11ImplReports/UbiquityIE7/ResultsTable.html">Ubiquity XForms
Internet Explorer processor</a> are now available. <a
href="http://code.google.com/p/ubiquity-xforms/">Ubiquity XForms</a> provides a
client-side Ajax/Javascript implementation of XForms 1.1.</p>

<p><strong id="d2009-03-04">2009-03-04</strong>: The <a
href="2008/XForms11ImplReports/Chiba/Results.html">XForms 1.1 implementation
report for the Chiba XForms processor</a> and <a
href="2008/XForms11ImplReports/XSLTForms/ResultsTable.html">XForms 1.1
implementation report for XSLTForms</a> are now available. <a
href="http://chiba.sourceforge.net/">Chiba</a> and <a
href="http://www.agencexml.com/xsltforms">XSLTForms</a> are both
implementations that can be used client- and/or server-side.</p>

<p><strong id="d2009-01-26">2009-01-26</strong>: EMC Documentum has provided an
<a href="2008/XForms11ImplReports/EMC/ResultsTable.html">XForms 1.1
implementation report for their EMC Formula processor</a>, a javascript
implementation tested under FireFox and IE6+. There also now available a <a
href="2008/XForms11ImplReports/Chiba/FocusedResults.html">focused
implementation report for the Chiba XForms processor</a>.</p>

<p><strong id="d2008-12-19">2008-12-19</strong>: The First Public Working Draft
(FPWD) of <a
href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/WD-XForms-for-HTML-20081219/">XForms for
HTML</a> has been published. This is an important milestone as it signifies W3C
Director approval to enter the technical report into the W3C Recommendation
track. The intent of this specification is to provide greater alignment of
XForms into web pages (both HTML and XHTML). A combination of attribute
decoration and script methods simplifies the web author experience of getting
started with XForms. The script methods and the semantics of the attributes are
mapped onto the rich XForms model-view-controller-connector architecture,
providing authors with a smoother, selective migration path to the more
elaborated behaviors available from the full element markup available in
modules of XForms.</p>

<p><strong id="d2008-12-04">2008-12-04</strong>: <a
href="2008/XForms11ImplReports/FFplugins/ResultsTable.html">XForms 1.1
implementation reports</a> are now available for the <a
href="https://addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addons/versions/824">XForms extension
for Firefox version 0.8.6</a> for Firefox 2 and 3.</p>

<p><strong id="d2008-11-24">2008-11-24</strong>: Announcing <a
href="http://www-01.ibm.com/software/lotus/forms/">IBM Lotus Forms</a> version
3.5, the latest release of the XForms-powered software suite for designing and
deploying high-precision enterprise forms applications and business user data
collection applications. Please see <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/2008Dec/0003.html">the
announcement</a> for further details and a link leading to free trial
downloads.</p>

<p><strong id="d2008-10-07">2008-10-07</strong>: XForms extension for Firefox
version 0.8.6 for Firefox 2 and 3 is available for download from <a
href="https://addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addons/versions/824">http://addons.mozilla.org</a>.</p>

<p id="d2008-09-19"><strong>2008-09-19</strong>: Best Paper Award. Jack Jansen
and Dick Bulterman won the Best Paper award at the 2008 ACM Symposium on
Document Engineering for their paper entitled "<a
href="http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1410140.1410146&amp;coll=GUIDE&amp;dl=GUIDE&amp;type=series&amp;idx=SERIES10668&amp;part=series&amp;WantType=Proceedings&amp;title=DocEng&amp;CFID=://www.icmc.usp.br/~doceng08/&amp;CFTOKEN=www.icmc.usp.br/~doceng08/">Enabling
Adaptive Time-based Web Applications with SMIL State</a>". The paper presents a
very interesting mix of SMIL, XForms and other technologies to enable end-users
to customize their experience of content where time dictates the major
structure. One example given is of a video bike tour of Amsterdam. Fragments of
the video content can be identified and tagged with keywords. During run-time,
an XForm is used to allow an end-user to select from the available keywords
those which they find interesting, and the corresponding fragments of video are
played. <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/2008Sep/0007">Read
more</a>.</p>

<p id="d2008-09-14"><strong>2008-09-14</strong>: Yahoo! announces a development
platform to help create standalone XForms applications. <a
href="http://www.windowsfordevices.com/news/NS6599416217.html">Read
more</a>.</p>

<p id="d2008-08-28"><strong>2008-08-28</strong>: XForms Accessibility - Mozilla
Developer Center. Assistive technologies API for XForms is supported starting
from Firefox 3 (Gecko 1.9). Implementation of accessible objects for XForms
elements is based on top of the existing object hierarchy introduced in the
Mozilla accessibility module. XForms elements behavior is implemented in
accordance with accessible toolkit checklist. <a
href="http://developer.mozilla.org/en/Accessibility/XForms">http://developer.mozilla.org/en/Accessibility/XForms</a></p>

<p id="d2008-08-27"><strong>2008-08-27</strong>: XRX: Simple, Elegant,
Disruptive. A meme gathering momentum on the Web is <em>"XRX" - XForms on the
client, REST interfaces, XQuery on the server</em>. <a
href="http://www.oreillynet.com/xml/blog/2008/05/xrx_a_simple_elegant_disruptiv_1.html">One
posting</a> was by Dan McCreary on xml.com which contained the memorable
quote</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>Traditional methods required approximately 40 inserts into separate tables
  within a relational database. The use of XForms and eXist resulted in one
  line of XQuery code:</p>
  <pre>    store(collection, file, data)</pre>

  <p>That was it. Simple. Elegant. I was hooked.</p>
</blockquote>

<p>The meme has been popping up elsewhere. For instance, see <a
href="http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/XRX">XRX</a> at Wikibooks, and <a
href="http://news.oreilly.com/2008/07/xrx-performing-updates.html">XRX:
Performing Updates</a> at O'Reilly. Other links to the same ideas, though
without using the XRX name are<a
href="http://www.slideshare.net/ebruchez/xforms-and-exist-a-perfect-couple/">:
XForms and eXist: A Perfect Couple</a> and <a
href="http://internet-apps.blogspot.com/2006/09/xforms-rest-xqueryand-skimming.html">XForms,
REST, XQuery...and skimming</a>.</p>
</div>

<h2><a id="Links" name="Links">Links</a></h2>
<ul>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/wiki/FaceToFace">Face to face
    meetings</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/wiki/News">News from the W3C
    Forms Working Group</a></li>
  <li><a
    href="http://news.google.com/news?hl=en&amp;q=XForms&amp;scoring=d&amp;btnG=Google+Search">XForms
    news coverage</a> (Google)</li>
  <!-- <li><a href="http://planetxforms.org/">Planet XForms</a></li> -->
  <li><a
    href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/wiki/XForms_Implementations"><strong>Implementations
    of XForms</strong></a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/wiki/">The W3C Forms Working
    Group Wiki</a></li>
  <li>The <a href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-forms-tf/">mail
    archive</a> of the Forms Joint Task Force formed with the <a
    href="http://www.w3.org/html/wg/">W3C HTML Working Group</a>.</li>
  <li><a
    href="http://www.w3.org/2004/08/W3CTalks?date=Recent+and+upcoming&amp;activity=XHTML+and+XForms">Upcoming
    talks on XHTML and XForms</a></li>
</ul>

<h2 id="documents">Publications</h2>

<h3>Editor's Drafts</h3>
<ul>
  <li>XForms 1.2 Features <a
    href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/wiki/Category:XForms12">working group
    drafts</a></li>
  <li>XHTML + XForms 1.1 <a
    href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/2010/xhtml_xforms11.zip">Draft Schema
    in Zip File</a>.</li>
  <!-- We can uncomment this when we start to prepare a PER for second edition 1.1
            	
              <li>XForms 1.1 <a href="specs/XForms1.1/index-all.html">editor's draft</a>,
                <a href="specs/XForms1.1/index-diff.html">diff-marked version</a>, and <a
                href="specs/XForms1.1/xforms11.full.zip">source bundle</a></li>
                
              -->
  <!--        
                                  <li>XForms 1.2 <a href="specs/XForms1.2/XForms12.full.zip">source bundle</a></li>
                            <li>The <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/instance/dataIsland/Data-Island-Module.html">Data
                              Island Module</a>. </li>
                            <li>An <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/instance/xpathFunctions/index-all.html">XPath
                              Functions Library</a>, the <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/instance/xpathFunctions/index-diff.html">diff-marked
                              version</a>, and the <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/instance/xpathFunctions/XForms.XPathFunctions.zip">source
                              bundle</a></li>
                            <li>The <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/instance/bindingAttributes/index-all.html">Binding
                              Attributes Module</a>, the <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/instance/bindingAttributes/index-diff.html">diff-marked
                              version</a>, and the <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/instance/bindingAttributes/XForms.BindingAttributes.zip">source
                              bundle</a></li>
                            <li>The <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/instance/dataAccessors/Data-Accessors-Module.html">Data
                              Island Module</a>. </li>
                            <li>The <a href="specs/XForms1.2/modules/model/bind/index-all.html">Bind
                              Module</a>. </li>
                            <li>The <a href="specs/XForms1.2/XFormsForHTML/index-all.html">XForms for
                              HTML</a>, the <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/XFormsForHTML/index-diff.html">diff-marked
                              version</a>, and the <a
                              href="specs/XForms1.2/XFormsForHTML/XFormsForHTML.zip">source
                            bundle</a></li>
                                -->
</ul>

<h3>XForms 1.1</h3>
<ul>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-xforms-20091020/">XForms 1.1
    Recommendation</a>, <a
    href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/2007/XForms-11-Schema.xsd">XForms 1.1
    Schema</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/PR-xforms11-20090818/">XForms 1.1
    Proposed Recommendation</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/CR-xforms11-20071129/">XForms 1.1
    Candidate Recommendation</a></li>
  <li><a
    href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/Test/XForms1.1/Edition1/driverPages/html/index.html">XForms
    1.1 Test Suite</a>, <a
    href="http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/Forms/Test/XForms1.1/Edition1/zip/TestCases11.zip">Zip
    file</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/xforms-11-req/">XForms 1.1 Requirements</a>
    (W3C Working Group Note)</li>
</ul>

<h3>XForms 1.0</h3>
<ul>
  <li><strong><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-xforms-20071029/">XForms
    1.0 (Third Edition) Recommendation</a></strong>, <a
    href="Test/XForms1.0/Edition3/front_html/XF103edTestSuite.html">Test
    Suite</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2003/CR-xforms-basic-20031014/">XForms 1.0
    Basic Profile</a>, now a W3C Candidate Recommendation. <a
    href="2008/XFormsBasicImplReport/BasicImplementationReport.html">Implementation
    Report</a>.</li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-xforms-20060314/">XForms 1.0
    (Second Edition) Recommendation</a> (Now superceded)</li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2003/REC-xforms-20031014/">XForms 1.0
    Recommendation</a> (Now superceded)</li>
  <li><a href="http://www.w3.org/2003/10/xforms-testimonial">Testimonials for
    W3C's XForms 1.0 Recommendation</a></li>
  <li><a href="Test/ImplementationReport.html">Implementation report</a></li>
  <li><a href="/TR/xhtml-forms-req">XForms 1.0 Requirements</a> (04 April
  2001).</li>
</ul>

<h3>Supporting Documents</h3>
<ul>
  <li><a href="2003/xforms-faq.html"><strong>XForms 1.0 Frequently Asked
    Questions</strong></a></li>
  <li>Tutorial - <a href="2003/xforms-for-html-authors">XForms for HTML
    Authors: Part 1</a> and <a href="2006/xforms-for-html-authors-part2"
    shape="rect">XForms for HTML Authors: Part 2</a></li>
  <li><a href="2006/xforms-qr.html" shape="rect">XForms Quick Reference</a></li>
  <li><a href="2006/xforms.xsl" shape="rect">XHTML to XForms Converter</a> (in
    XSLT)</li>
</ul>

<p></p>
<!-- Old, for member access requests
<a href="http://cgi.w3.org/MemberAccess/AccessRequest">join</a>
-->

<h2><a id="deliverables" name="deliverables">Schedule of Deliverables</a></h2>

<table class="roadmap" width="80%">
  <caption>Schedule of Deliverables </caption>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1">Specification</th>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1"><acronym
        title="First Working Draft">FPWD</acronym></th>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1"><acronym
        title="Last Call Working Draft">LC</acronym></th>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1"><acronym
        title="Canditate Recommendation">CR</acronym></th>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1"><acronym
        title="Proposed Recommendation">PR</acronym></th>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1"><acronym
      title="Recommendation">Rec</acronym></th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1">XForms 1.1</th>
      <td class="WD1" rowspan="1" colspan="1"><a
        href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/WD-xforms11-20041115/">Nov 2004</a></td>
      <td class="LC" rowspan="1" colspan="1"><a
        href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/WD-xforms11-20070222/">Feb 2007</a></td>
      <td class="CR" rowspan="1" colspan="1"><a
        href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/CR-xforms11-20071129/">Nov 2007</a></td>
      <td class="PR" rowspan="1" colspan="1"><a
        href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/PR-xforms11-20090818/">August
      2009</a></td>
      <td class="REC" rowspan="1" colspan="1"><a
        href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-xforms-20091020/">October
      2009</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1">XForms for HTML <br />
        (1.2 Transitional)</th>
      <td class="WD1" rowspan="1" colspan="1"><a
        href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/WD-XForms-for-HTML-20081219/">Dec
        2008</a></td>
      <td class="LC" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Jun 2010</td>
      <td class="CR" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Oct 2010</td>
      <td class="PR" rowspan="1" colspan="1">May 2011</td>
      <td class="REC" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Jun 2011</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1">XForms 1.2</th>
      <td class="WD1" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Dec 2009</td>
      <td class="LC" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Jun 2010</td>
      <td class="CR" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Oct 2010</td>
      <td class="PR" rowspan="1" colspan="1">May 2011</td>
      <td class="REC" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Jun 2011</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th rowspan="1" colspan="1">XForms 2.0</th>
      <td class="WD1" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Nov 2010</td>
      <td class="LC" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Nov 2011</td>
      <td class="CR" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Sep 2011</td>
      <td class="PR" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Sep 2012</td>
      <td class="REC" rowspan="1" colspan="1">Nov 2012</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<h2><a id="email11" name="email11">The Forms Working Group Mailing
Lists</a></h2>

<h3><a id="public-forms" name="public-forms">correc@ti.con</a></h3>

<p>The Forms Working Group maintains a public mailing list (<a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-forms/">archive</a>, <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-forms/feed.rss">RSS feed</a>)
for public access to Working Group technical discussions as well as logistics
such as meeting agendas and minutes. </p>

<h3><a id="www-forms" name="www-forms">correc@ti.con</a></h3>

<p>The general public can join in on the technical discussions using the <a
href="mailto:correc@ti.con?subject=subscribe">correc@ti.con</a>
correc@ti.con mailing list. An <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/">archive</a> and an <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms/feed.rss">RSS feed</a>
<!-- <a href="http://www.w3.org/2002/09/Lists2RSS?ml=www-forms&amp;realm=Public">RSS feed</a> -->
of the list are available.</p>

<p><strong>Subscribe/Unsubscribe</strong>:<br />
Send an email to <a
href="mailto:correc@ti.con?subject=subscribe">correc@ti.con</a>
with the word <i>subscribe</i> in the email subject header. (To unsubscribe,
send email to the same address with the word <i>unsubscribe</i> in the email
subject header.) .</p>

<p>For additional help, consult the <a href="/Mail/Request">W3C's public email
list pages</a>.</p>

<h3><a id="www-forms-editor"
name="www-forms-editor">correc@ti.con</a></h3>

<p>Send review comments about Forms Working Group specifications. Additionally,
an <a href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms-editor/">archive</a>
and an <a
href="http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-forms-editor/feed.rss">RSS
feed</a>
<!-- <a href="http://www.w3.org/2002/09/Lists2RSS?ml=www-forms-editor&amp;realm=Public">RSS feed</a> -->
of the list are available.</p>

<h2><a id="waXForms" name="waXForms">What Are XForms?</a></h2>

<p>Traditional HTML Web forms don't separate the <em>purpose</em> from the
<em>presentation</em> of a form. XForms, in contrast, are comprised of separate
sections that describe what the form does, and how the form looks. This allows
for flexible presentation options, including classic XHTML forms, to be
attached to an XML form definition.</p>

<p>The following illustrates how a single device-independent XML form
definition, called the <strong>XForms Model</strong>, has the capability to
work with a variety of standard or proprietary user interfaces:</p>

<p class="fig"><img src="arch1.png" width="256" height="390"
alt="diagram showing an XForms Model puzzle piece potentailly connecting to many possible user interface puzzle pieces: XForms, XHTML, WML, and proprietary"
/> </p>

<p>The <strong>XForms User Interface</strong> provides a standard set of visual
controls that are targeted toward replacing today's XHTML form controls. These
form controls are directly usable inside XHTML and other XML documents, like
SVG. Other groups, such as the Voice Browser Working Group, may also
independently develop user interface components for XForms.</p>

<p>An important concept in XForms is that forms collect data, which is
expressed as XML <strong>instance data</strong>. Among other duties, the XForms
Model describes the structure of the instance data. This is important, since
like XML, forms represent a structured interchange of data. Workflow,
auto-fill, and pre-fill form applications are supported through the use of
instance data.</p>

<p>Finally, there needs to be a channel for instance data to flow to and from
the XForms Processor. For this, the <strong>XForms Submit Protocol</strong>
defines how XForms send and receive data, including the ability to suspend and
resume the completion of a form.</p>

<p>The following illustration summarizes the main aspects of XForms:</p>

<p class="fig"><img src="arch2.png" width="202" height="313"
alt="Diagram of the connected XForms Model and XForms User Interface puzzle pieces. Below that, a double-headed arrow labeled XForms Submit Protocol. Below that, a document icon labeled XML Instance Data"
/> </p>

<h2><a id="goals" name="goals">Key Goals of XForms</a></h2>
<ul>
  <li>Support for structured form data</li>
  <li>Advanced forms logic without server round-tripping</li>
  <li>Dynamic access to server data sources during form execution</li>
  <li>Decoupled data, logic and presentation</li>
  <li>Seamless integration with other XML tag sets</li>
  <li>Richer user interface to meet the needs of business, consumer and device
    control applications</li>
  <li>Support for handheld, television, and desktop browsers, plus printers and
    scanners</li>
  <li>Improved internationalization and accessibility</li>
  <li>Multiple forms per page, and pages per form</li>
  <li>Suspend and Resume capabilities</li>
</ul>

<h2>Getting Help</h2>
<ul>
  <li><a href="2003/xforms-faq.html">XForms 1.0 Frequently Asked Questions</a>
    is available</li>
  <li><a href="2003/xforms-for-html-authors.html">XForms for HTML
    Authors</a><strong>.</strong> An introduction to XForms for people who know
    HTML Forms.</li>
  <li><a href="2006/xforms-qr">XForms Quick Reference</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.ddj.com/184406031">XForms &amp; Cause-and-Effect
    Programming</a><strong>.</strong> A brief introduction to XForms concepts
    and markup via a sample form.</li>
  <li><a href="http://xformsinstitute.com">An interactive tutorial for W3C
    XForms</a>. The site not only describes how XForms works, but also includes
    interactive exercises written in XForms.</li>
  <li>For a perspective on how XForms is enabling increasingly sophisticated
    web applications that arise in financial/banking, insurance, health care,
    and enterprise information management, see the papers <a
    href="http://www.idealliance.org/proceedings/xml05/abstracts/paper74.HTML">XFDL
    + XForms</a> and <a
    href="http://www.idealliance.org/proceedings/xml05/abstracts/paper1.HTML">XSL-FO
    + XForms</a>.</li>
  <li>For a perspective on XML signatures and XForms, please see <a
    href="http://2006.xmlconference.org/programme/presentations/100.html">Applying
    XML Signatures to XForms-based Documents</a> in the XML 2006 conference
    proceedings.</li>
  <li id="KurtUnderstandingXForms">Kurt Cagle's Six Part Series on
    Understanding XForms: <a
    href="http://www.oreillynet.com/xml/blog/2006/03/why_xforms_matter_revisited.html">Why
    XForms Matter, Revisited</a>, <a
    href="http://www.oreillynet.com/xml/blog/2006/03/understanding_xforms_the_model.html">The
    Model</a>, <a
    href="http://www.oreillynet.com/xml/blog/2006/06/understanding_xforms_component.html">Components</a>,
    <a
    href="http://www.oreillynet.com/xml/blog/2006/07/understanding_xforms_customiza.html">Customization</a>,
    <a
    href="http://www.oreillynet.com/xml/blog/2006/08/understanding_xforms_events_an.html">Events
    and Actions</a>, and <a
    href="http://www.oreillynet.com/xml/blog/2006/08/understanding_xforms_ajax_xbl.html">AJAX,
    XBL and XForms.org</a>.</li>
  <li><a href="http://www.xforms.org">XForms.Org</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XForms">XForms on Wikipedia</a></li>
</ul>
<hr />
<address id="contact">
  Steven Pemberton, Co-chair, Team contact, W3C/CWI, <a
  href="mailto:correc@ti.con">correc@ti.con</a><br />
  Leigh Klotz, Co-chair, Xerox 
</address>

<p>Last updated: $Date: 2015/04/08 14:44:50 $</p>

<p class="copyright"><small><a rel="Copyright"
href="/Consortium/Legal/ipr-notice#Copyright">Copyright</a> © 1999-2010 <a
href="/"><acronym
title="World Wide Web Consortium">W3C</acronym></a><sup>®</sup> (<a
href="http://www.lcs.mit.edu/"><acronym
title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology">MIT</acronym></a>, <a
href="http://www.ercim.org/"><acronym
title="European Research Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics">ERCIM</acronym></a>,
<a href="http://www.keio.ac.jp/">Keio</a>), All Rights Reserved. W3C <a
href="/Consortium/Legal/ipr-notice#Legal_Disclaimer">liability</a>, <a
href="/Consortium/Legal/ipr-notice#W3C_Trademarks">trademark</a>, <a
rel="Copyright" href="/Consortium/Legal/copyright-documents">document use</a>
and <a rel="Copyright" href="/Consortium/Legal/copyright-software">software
licensing</a> rules apply. Your interactions with this site are in accordance
with our <a href="/Consortium/Legal/privacy-statement#Public">public</a> and <a
href="/Consortium/Legal/privacy-statement#Members">Member</a> privacy
statements.</small></p>
</body>
</html>
